Alex v. Dr. X, 692 So. 2d 499 - La: Court of Appeals, 3rd Circuit 1997 Raymond ALEX, Plaintiff—Appellant v. DR. X, Defendant—Appellee. Court of Appeal of Louisiana, Third Circuit. 500*500 Sera Hearn Russell III, Lafayette, for Raymond Alex. St. Paul Bourgeois IV, Joel Edward Gooch, Layayette, for Dr. X. Before DOUCET, C.J., and WOODARD and GREMILLION, JJ. WOODARD, Judge. A deceased woman's family brought this wrongful death and survival action against her physician, alleging that the physician committed medical malpractice when she prescribed medication for suspected tuberculosis before the tuberculosis test results had returned. Later, the test results indicated a negative result for tuberculosis. The deceased died shortly thereafter from a severe liver condition. Defendant filed a Motion for Summary Judgment which was granted by the trial court. Plaintiffs appeal the trial court's judgment. We affirm. FACTS FACTS In early February 1988, Betty Alex went to the Louisiana State Department of Health and Human Resources Public Health Unit where she met with Dr. Felipa B. Diaz, set out as Dr. X in the caption above. During that visit, Mrs. Alex underwent a chest x-ray, which was indicative of tuberculosis. After an examination, Dr. Diaz diagnosed possible tuberculosis and immediately began a regimen 501*501 of medication for the treatment of tuberculosis. Mrs. Alex was actually given two different medications, PZA and INH, which were to be taken together. In addition, three sputum specimens and cultures were taken for tuberculosis tests. On February 24, 1988, Mrs. Alex was called back to the clinic at the Public Health Service because of the negative result of the tuberculosis test and abnormal results on her liver function tests. Upon returning to the clinic, she was again x-rayed and had additional specimens taken. In addition, because Dr. Diaz suspected possible sarcoidosis, a condition unrelated to tuberculosis, she referred Mrs. Alex to Dr. Ernest F. Wong, a pulmonary specialist, for a bronchoscopy. The tuberculosis medication was suspended at that time, and Dr. Wong became Mrs. Alex's treating physician. Mrs. Alex died approximately seventeen months later, on July 20, 1989, due to complications concerning her liver, stemming from sarcoidosis. On July 11, 1990, the plaintiffs filed suit against Dr. Diaz for wrongful death and survival damages due to the demise of Mrs. Alex, the wife and mother of the plaintiffs. The suit was initiated after a medical review panel had been convened and had rendered an opinion on the matter in favor of the defendant. In the suit, the plaintiffs allege that Dr. Diaz was negligent in prescribing anti-tuberculosis medication prior to receiving the results of certain tests that would have contradicted or confirmed her initial findings. The plaintiffs further claim that the medicine, which they allege is highly toxic to the liver, had a negative effect on Mrs. Alex, thereby causing further damage to her liver. Thereafter, the defendant filed a Motion for Summary Judgment based on the pleadings, depositions, and the medical review panel's opinion. After a hearing on March 25, 1996, the trial court granted the defendant's motion and dismissed the suit. Plaintiffs appeal the trial court's ruling. ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR The plaintiffs, in their sole assignment of error, claim that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Dr. Diaz, because material issues of fact remain and there are inferences of medical negligence that the jury can draw from the facts. LAW LAW SUMMARY JUDGMENT SUMMARY JUDGMENT Appellate courts review summary judgments de novo under the same criteria that govern the district court's consideration of whether summary judgment is appropriate. Potter v. First Federal Savings & Loan, 615 So.2d 318 (La.1993). A motion for summary judgment is properly granted only if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits submitted, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the mover is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. La.Code Civ.P. art. 966(B). A fact is "material" if its existence potentially insures or precludes recovery, affects a litigant's ultimate success, or determines the outcome of the relevant legal dispute. Cormier v. Wise, 93-1434 (La.App. 3 Cir. 6/1/94); 638 So.2d 688. A fact is "at issue" if there exists any reasonable doubt as to its existence. Durrosseau v. Century 21 Flavin Realty, 594 So.2d 1036 (La.App. 3 Cir.1992). The law of this state has always supported the proposition that "[s]ummary judgments are not favored and should be used cautiously and sparingly, and any reasonable doubt should be resolved against the mover." Penton v. Clarkson, 93-657 (La.App. 1 Cir. 3/11/94); 633 So.2d 918, 922 (citations omitted). However, recent changes have occurred in this area as part of the 1996 legislative tort reform package. 1996 La.Sess.Law. Serv. 1st Ex.Sess. Act 9 (S.B.27) (WEST). In the 1996 special session, Act 9 of 1996 amended La.Code Civ.P. art. 966, effective May 1, 1996. Article 966 now states, in pertinent part: (Emphasis added). In the past, any doubt regarding the existence of material facts was to be resolved against granting the summary judgment, even if grave doubts existed as to a party's ability to establish disputed facts at trial. Penton, 633 So.2d 918. The amendment does not change the law regarding burdens of proof, as the mover is still required to prove the absence of a genuine issue and his entitlement to judgment. La.Code Civ.P. art. 966(C) & (G); Short v. Giffin, 96-0361 (La.App. 4 Cir. 8/21/96); 682 So.2d 249; Walter v. Kroop, 96-0618 (La.App. 4 Cir. 7/24/96); 678 So.2d 580. However, it now appears, based on the new language of section (C), that in order to rebut a showing made by the mover of the non-existence of a genuine issue of material fact, the non-moving party will be held to a higher standard of proof, i.e. a non-moving party must sufficiently establish the existence of proof of an essential element of his claim on which he is to bear the burden of proving at trial. La. Code Civ.P. art. 966(C). Furthermore, La. Code Civ.P. art 967 provides, in pertinent part: It is well understood that summary judgment is a procedural rule. See Penalber v. Blount, 550 So.2d 577 (La.1989). Therefore, the amended Article 966 should be applied retroactively to pending motions and cases on appeal, and particularly to the case sub judice. Short, 682 So.2d 249. STANDARD OF CARE IN MEDICAL MALPRACTICE CASES STANDARD OF CARE IN MEDICAL MALPRACTICE CASES The term medical "malpractice" is defined, in pertinent part, in La.R.S. 40:1299.39 as follows: In order to prove medical malpractice, a plaintiff must satisfy the three-prong test defined in La.R.S. 9:2794: In Gordon v. Louisiana State University Bd. of Sup'rs., 27,966, pp. 4-5 (La.App. 2 Cir. 3/1/96); 669 So.2d 736, 740, writ denied, 96-1038 (La.5/31/96); 674 So.2d 263 (citations omitted), the court elaborated on the plaintiff's burden of proof as follows: Furthermore, as the supreme court stated in Hastings v. Baton Rouge General Hosp., 498 So.2d 713, 720 (La.1986), "[i]t is not necessary [for a plaintiff] to prove that a patient would have survived if proper treatment had been given, but only that there would have been a chance of survival." As La.R.S. 9:2794(A)(1) makes clear, a physician who is not a specialist is to be held to the standard of care exercised by other physicians licensed to practice in this state who are actively practicing in a similar community under similar circumstances. A physician is not required to exercise the highest degree of care possible, rather he must only exercise the degree of skill ordinarily employed by his peers under like circumstances, using reasonable care and his best judgment in performing the skill. Matthews v. La. State University Medical Center in Shreveport, 467 So.2d 1238 (La.App. 2 Cir.1985). In Gibson v. Bossier City General Hosp., 594 So.2d 1332, 1337 (La.App. 2 Cir. 1991), the court recognized that "[a]n unsuccessful course of treatment is not per se an indication of malpractice." Therefore, the law does not require absolute precision. Gordon, 669 So.2d 736. Rather, "[a] physician's conduct and professional judgment must be evaluated in terms of the reasonableness under the existing circumstances and should not be viewed in hindsight and in terms of results or in light of subsequent events." Id. at 740. ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR NUMBER 1 ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR NUMBER 1 The plaintiffs claim that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Dr. Diaz, because material issues of fact remain and there are inferences of medical negligence that the jury can draw from the facts. After a thorough review of the record, and for the reasons discussed below, we find that the trial judge was correct in granting summary judgment in favor of Dr. Diaz. At the hearing on the motion for summary judgment, Dr. Diaz claimed that no genuine issue of material fact existed regarding whether she failed to adhere to the requisite standards of reasonable care ordinarily practiced by physicians within the involved medical specialty. In support of her position, and in order to prove that she was entitled to judgment, Dr. Diaz presented to the trial court her own deposition, as well as the depositions of Dr. Wong, Mrs. Alex's treating physician, Dr. Phillip S. Perret, and the medical review panel opinion which concluded that Dr. Diaz did not breach the standard of care. Dr. Diaz is a specialist in internal medicine. Both Drs. Wong and Perret are internists with subspecialties in pulmonary medicine. In their depositions, both doctors stated unequivocally that Dr. Diaz' actions regarding her treatment of Mrs. Alex fell squarely within the degree of care exercised by physicians who specialize in internal medicine, and was reasonable under the circumstances. Specifically, Dr. Wong testified as follows: In his testimony, Dr. Wong emphasized the reasons for Dr. Diaz' approach to the treatment of Mrs. Alex for suspected tuberculosis. Specifically, Dr. Wong stated that a conclusive diagnosis from a tuberculosis culture could take up to six weeks to procure, may not be accurate, and a delay in treatment could lead to a spread of this highly contagious disease. Dr. Perret also testified regarding Dr. Diaz' treatment of Mrs. Alex and the standard of care among the internist community. He stated: As can be seen from the testimony presented, Drs. Wong and Perret were in complete agreement regarding the standard of care for a patient in Mrs. Alex' condition, and Dr. Diaz' adherence to that standard in her treatment of Mrs. Alex. First, Dr. Diaz properly established the degree of care ordinarily exercised by internists under these circumstances, the first element of a medical malpractice claim. See La.R.S. 9:2794(A)(1). Second, and more importantly, Dr. Diaz established that she did not lack knowledge or skill, nor did she fail to use reasonable care and diligence, along with her best judgment in treating Mrs. Alex, the second element of a medical malpractice claim. See Id. at (A)(2). Therefore, Dr. Diaz presented sufficient evidence, through the depositions and medical review panel opinion, that she was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. As stated above, pursuant to La.Code Civ.P. art. 966(C), in order to rebut the showing made by Dr. Diaz and demonstrate the 506*506 existence of a genuine issue of material fact, the plaintiffs are required to sufficiently establish the existence of proof of an essential element of their claim on which they are to bear the burden of proving at trial. Short, 682 So.2d 249. Specifically, the plaintiffs must show the existence of proof that Dr. Diaz breached the established standard of care in her treatment of Mrs. Alex. The plaintiffs, however, presented no such evidence. While the plaintiffs were able to establish the applicable standard of care through the testimony of Drs. Wong, Perret and Diaz, thereby satisfying their burden of proof for the first prong of a medical malpractice cause of action, they presented no evidence that would tend to indicate a breach in that standard, the second prong of a medical malpractice cause of action. In fact, the plaintiffs did not present any expert or other testimony or evidence which would indicate that the standard of care was breached in this instance, a showing necessary to refute Dr. Diaz' proof of compliance with the standard, or proof that a genuine issue of material fact remained. Instead, plaintiffs rely on Pfiffner v. Correa, 94-0924, 94-0963, 94-0992 (La.10/17/94); 643 So.2d 1228, for the proposition that when a physician commits an obviously careless act, a lay person may be able to infer negligence from the act itself. In Pfiffner, the supreme court stated: 643 So.2d at 1233-34. The plaintiffs reliance on Pfiffner, however, is markedly misplaced based on the facts of this case, as the alleged acts of Dr. Diaz fall far below the obvious careless acts discussed by the supreme court above. Indeed, the issues presented in the case sub judice involve complicated medical matters relating to the effects of particular medications and infectious disease, subjects in which a lay juror would not likely be informed. Therefore, in this case, it was necessary for the plaintiffs to present proof of the existence of some medical expert evidence that Dr. Diaz breached the established standard of care in order to defeat the motion for summary judgment. Furthermore, as indicated by La.R.S. 9:2794, the plaintiffs are not only required to present proof of the standard of care and that Dr. Diaz violated that standard, but they must also present proof of the third element of a medical malpractice claim; namely, that as a proximate result of the alleged breach in the standard of care, Mrs. Alex's suffered injuries that would not otherwise have been incurred. Even if a jury would be able to infer negligence from the mere act of Dr. Diaz prescribing the medication before receiving the results of the tuberculosis test, the plaintiffs presented no proof that there was a causal connection between Mrs. Alex' death and the medication that Dr. Diaz had prescribed. Pfiffner, 643 So.2d 1228. In other words, the plaintiffs presented no evidence that would tend to prove that the INH medication prescribed by Dr. Diaz aggravated 507*507 Mrs. Alex' existing liver condition to the point of ultimately causing her death. The issue of causation, however, was addressed by Dr. Diaz in her motion for summary judgment. In fact, Dr. Diaz argued that there existed a "conclusive absence of proof that Mrs. Alex suffered any injuries from the treatment of Dr. Diaz that would not otherwise have been incurred." Again, support for this contention can be found in the testimony presented in support of the motion. On the subject of causation, Dr. Wong testified as follows: Q. Okay. With ... Betty Alex, do you think there was any long-term adverse side effects from her having taken the INH? Dr. Perret also testified concerning the causation issue, as follows: Therefore, Dr. Diaz met the requirements for the granting of summary judgment as the plaintiffs failed to rebut her showing with proof of the existence of genuine issues of material issues of fact. The plaintiffs failed to meet their burden pursuant to the requirements of La.Code Civ.P. art. 966. In addition, the plaintiffs failed to present the requisite evidence necessary to sustain a medical malpractice claim under La.R.S. 9:2794. RELEVANT CASE LAW REGARDING THE GRANTING OF A DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT IN A MEDICAL MALPRACTICE PROCEEDING In Richoux v. Tulane Medical Center, 617 So.2d 13 (La.App. 4 Cir.1993), the court upheld the trial court's granting of summary judgment in favor of the defendants in a medical malpractice action. In support of their motion for summary judgment, the defendants presented the following: "[P]laintiff's answers to defendants' interrogatories which did not identify any expert who would testify that defendants breached the applicable standard of care; the opinion of the medical review panel that the evidence did not support a finding that defendants breached the applicable standard of care; and the deposition of [one of the doctors on the panel] in which he reiterated that it was his opinion defendants had not breached the applicable standard of care." Id. at 16-17. In 508*508 their de novo review, the appellate court concluded that the defendants had met the burden of proving the non-existence of a genuine issue of material fact. In addition, the court recognized that, once the defendants had met their burden, "[t]he burden then shifted to plaintiff to set forth specific facts showing that there was a genuine issue of material fact precluding the granting of summary judgment." Id. at 17 (citations omitted). However, the plaintiff offered no affidavits based on personal knowledge or depositions which set forth facts that would be admissible in evidence at a trial on the merits, pursuant to the requirements of La.Code Civ.P. art. 967. As such, the plaintiff was resting on the mere allegations of her pleadings, which are not sufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment or rebut the defendant's showing of the non-existence of any genuine issues of material fact and is prohibited pursuant to article 967. Id. Therefore, the court concluded that at the time the trial court ruled on the motion, the defendants were entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Similarly, in Fortenberry v. Berthier, 503 So.2d 596 (La.App. 4 Cir.1987), the plaintiffs appealed the granting of a motion for summary judgment in favor of the defendants in a medical malpractice action. Specifically, the plaintiffs alleged that one of the physicians had prescribed a particular medication which led to further injury. In support of their motion for summary judgment, the physicians submitted: an affidavit based on personal knowledge, pursuant to La.Code Civ. P. art. 967, in which they denied ever giving that medication to the patient; the medical review panel opinion, which was favorable to the defendants; an expert opinion offered by the plaintiffs, which was "generally favorable" to the defendants; and evidence that the only experts the plaintiffs intended to call at trial were the members of the medical review panel. Id. at 597. Thus, the plaintiffs presented no evidence to support their suit pursuant to La.R.S. 9:2794. In affirming the lower court's judgment, the court concluded: Id. at 598. These cases are analogous to the case sub judice and should be followed. The plaintiffs in the present case gave no indication of their intention to call someone other than Drs. Wong, Perret, and Diaz in support of their claims. Furthermore, it is unlikely that the plaintiffs intended to call any other expert witnesses in support of their claims as is evidenced by their reliance on Pfiffner, 643 So.2d 1228, which stands for the proposition that expert medical testimony is not required in certain medical malpractice cases. However, since that case is not applicable to the present case and based on the foregoing analysis, we find that the trial court's granting of Dr. Diaz' motion for summary judgment was appropriate. CONCLUSION CONCLUSION The ruling of the trial court granting summary judgment in favor of Dr. Diaz is affirmed. AFFIRMED. Save trees - read court opinions online on Google Scholar.