Alex v. Allen, 409 F. Supp. 379 - Dist. Court, WD Pennsylvania 1976 Henry ALEX, by Floyd K. Alex and Edith Alex v. E. J. ALLEN, Individually and in his official capacity as Assistant Principal of the Cranberry Senior High School, et al. United States District Court, W. D. Pennsylvania. 380*380 James E. Bukac, Franklin, Pa., for plaintiff. John E. Egan, Franklin, Pa., for defendants. MEMORANDUM OPINION MEMORANDUM OPINION KNOX, District Judge. This cause of action arises from a thirty-day suspension of the plaintiff Henry Alex, from the Cranberry Area Senior High School in Venango County, Pennsylvania. This action was taken at a meeting of the Cranberry Area School District School Board on April 21, 1975. The complaint in this case was filed on May 15, 1975, and on June 30, 1975, a motion to dismiss the Cranberry School District, filed on June 6, 1975, was granted. Motions to dismiss all the other defendants, filed on August 22, 1975, August 28, 1975, and on November 17, 1975, remain pending before the court. Before proceeding to consider the plaintiff's constitutional claims, several issues relating to the jurisdiction of this court need to be considered. JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES (A) Class Action Certification. (A) Class Action Certification. Rule 23(a)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure lists four prerequisites to the maintenance of any class action: A careful reading of the plaintiff's complaint reveals that the above requirements have not been met and certification of this case as a class action will be denied. The complaint states that: Yet the complaint also states that: The plaintiff's expulsion or rather suspension was thus a unique experience at Cranberry High School — his claims are individual and distinct from those of the rest of the class. Of course, since the court finds that the requirements of Rule 23(a) have not been established, it is not necessary to discuss the standards for the three types of class actions under Rule 23(b). The requirements of both subdivisions A and B of Rule 23 must be established before the court can certify a class. Richardson v. Hamilton International Corporation, 62 F.R.D. 413 (E.D.Pa.1974). See also the opinion of this court in Stavrides v. Mellon Bank, et al., D. C., 69 F.R.D. 424, decided on November 25, 1975, in regard to the issues involved in the area of class action certification. There is only one claim which the plaintiff might arguably share in common with the other students at Cranberry High School. This is the alleged chilling effect of the overly broad high school regulations. As will be subsequently discussed, these contentions do not contain constitutional merit. The requirements of typicality, numerosity, and commonality have not been met and the court will deny certification of the class under Rule 23(c)(1). (B) The 1985 Claim. (B) The 1985 Claim. Plaintiff's claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1985 must also be denied on jurisdictional grounds. In relevant part, the statute provides: The courts have held that the elements of a conspiracy must be specifically pleaded to sustain a 1985 claim. "Broad, conclusory allegations of conspiracy are insufficient to state a cause of action." Weyandt v. Mason's Stores, Inc., 279 F.Supp. 283 (W.D.Pa.1968). In this case, there is not even a broad, conclusory allegation of conspiracy such as was deemed insufficient in Weyandt. See also Antieu, Chester J., Federal Civil Rights Act, Civil Practice (1971). ("Pleading the conspiracy customarily demands specific allegations." at p. 142, § 106). There is no allegation in this complaint of an agreement among the defendants to intentionally discriminate against the plaintiff which constitutes a conspiracy under 1985. See Antieu, supra, § 106 and cases cited therein. Further actions under 1985(3) must be based on some invidious racial or class discrimination. Nothing of this nature appears here. See Griffin v. Breckenridge, 403 U.S. 88, 91 S.Ct. 1790, 29 L.Ed.2d 338 (1971). II. SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES II. SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES Dismissal of the class action and 1985 claims from plaintiff's complaint leaves the 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and declaratory judgment issues based thereon for substantive consideration. After outlining the constitutional standards by which to evaluate motions to dismiss, the plaintiff's constitutional claims will be discussed in light of the extensive litigation regarding the rights of students in recent years. (A) Legal Standards Governing Motions to Dismiss. (A) Legal Standards Governing Motions to Dismiss. The United States Supreme Court has articulated the standards by which to judge motions to dismiss as follows: This circuit has expressed the rule in similar language: Melo-Sonics Corp. v. Cropp, 342 F.2d 856 (3d Cir. 1965). The above language is quoted from the early case of Continental Collieries v. Shober, 130 F.2d 631 (3d Cir. 1942). The above tests can now be applied to the three categories of constitutional issues advanced by the plaintiff: (B) The Void for Vagueness and Overbreadth Issue. (B) The Void for Vagueness and Overbreadth Issue. The following counts of plaintiff's complaint deal with his constitutional argument that the disciplinary rules of the Cranberry High School are vague and overbroad: A consideration of these allegations in light of recent case law reveals that "the plaintiff would not be entitled to relief under any state of facts which could be proved in support of his claim." See Cropp, supra. These allegations must therefore be dismissed from the plaintiff's complaint. Two recent United States Supreme Court cases considered the constitutional requirements for specificity in criminal statutes. In Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 94 S.Ct. 2547, 41 L.Ed.2d 439 (1974), the court upheld the constitutionality of a court martial conviction for "conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman." And in Rose v. Locke, 423 U.S. 48, 96 S.Ct. 243, 46 L.Ed.2d 185 (1975), the court upheld a Tennessee statute proscribing "crimes against nature". The Rose case summarized the fundamental requirements of due process as follows: It is questionable if the disciplinary rules of Cranberry High School could pass constitutional muster under the above Rose standards. The relevant portions of these disciplinary rules are: A number of these rules — 3, 8, 10 and 13 for instance — may not give the type of clear warning of the areas of proscribed conduct required by criminal statutes. The above disciplinary rules, however, need to be considered under a looser standard than the Rose test of criminal statutes. The Ninth Circuit recently summarized the cases dealing with the constitutionality of school regulations in the case of Black Coalition v. Portland School District No. 1, 484 F.2d 1040 (9th Cir. 1973): At least one subsequent case, Marin v. University of Puerto Rico, 377 F.Supp. 613 (D. Puerto Rico 1974) did hold college regulations to the same standards as criminal legislation. The court is disposed, however, to follow the line of cases referred to in Black Coalition, supra, rather than Marin, supra, for several reasons. First, the college regulations in Marin involved prior restraints of pickets, marches and meetings and thus more directly implicated First Amendment rights than the regulations challenged in this case. A second factor militating in favor of the Black Coalition rather than the Marin test is that high school rather than college regulations have been challenged. The court in Black Coalition quoted the following proposition from an earlier case: In addition, a looser standard of constitutional review of high school regulations is appropriate because of the greater flexibility possessed by the state to regulate the conduct of children as opposed to adults. In Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629, 88 S.Ct. 1274, 20 L.Ed.2d 195 (1968), the court held: Finally, a recent case in this circuit, Sill v. Pennsylvania State University, 462 F.2d 463 (3d Cir. 1972) (Maris, J.), while not directly on point, favors the Black Coalition point of view. The Sill case arose from a series of student anti-war demonstrations at Penn State in 1970 in which the students had occupied several of the campus' administrative buildings and interfered with their operations. The court made the following ruling with respect to the university regulations under which the students were punished: As in Sill, the challenged regulations here spell out in sufficient detail the conduct which is forbidden. In Gere v. Stanley, 453 F.2d 205 (3d Cir. 1971), the court said the following about public school regulations: Conduct such as "flagrant disregard of teachers", "loitering in areas of heavy traffic", and "rowdy behavior in the areas of heavy traffic" clearly disrupts the educational process. The Cranberry High School regulations are directed at the patterns of behavior which may legitimately be proscribed by public school authorities and in light of the minimal constitutional standards of specificity for high school regulations, the plaintiffs void for vagueness and overbreadth arguments will be dismissed. (C) Procedural Due Process. (C) Procedural Due Process. The second category of plaintiff's constitutional arguments deal with procedural due process. There has also been considerable litigation in this area in recent years. See Goss v. Lopez, 419 U.S. 565, 95 S.Ct. 729, 42 L.Ed.2d 725 (1975). (An extensive annotation of these cases is contained in Footnote 8 on these pages.) The Supreme Court dealt with these issues in two cases decided in the last term. In Goss v. Lopez, 419 U.S. 565, 95 S.Ct. 729, 42 L.Ed.2d 725 (1975), nine high school students were suspended from Columbus High School for a period of ten days. An Ohio statute permitted the principal of high schools to suspend students without giving them prior notice or a hearing. The Supreme Court found that education is both a liberty and a property right protected by the Fourteenth Amendment: Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 95 S.Ct. 992, 43 L.Ed.2d 214 (1975), cautions against an expansive reading of Goss. The main thrust of this opinion dealt with the immunity of school board members from suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 — an issue we need not reach here in light of our disposition of plaintiff's other claims. At the end of the opinion, however, the court made the following comments about the scope of review the federal courts should accord to disciplinary decisions of high school officials: The issue in Goss was characterized by the Court as follows: "Once it is determined that due process applies, the question remains what process is due." (419 U.S. at 577, 95 S.Ct. at 738, 42 L.Ed.2d at 737) The expulsion of Henry Alex requires this court to consider the same issue. The court in Goss was very careful to limit the new due process rights it was according to high school students. In the Sill case in this circuit, the court delineated the due process rights of students in similar language. Goss and Sill evince the basic process due to students — adequate notice and a fair opportunity to be heard. While more formal requirements may be necessary for a thirty-day suspension than for a ten-day suspension as in Goss, a careful reading of the record convinces the court that the plaintiff's constitutional rights have been protected. Exhibit D, attached to plaintiff's complaint, shows that plaintiff's parents were informed of the school board hearing dealing with plaintiff's suspension in a letter dated March 11, 1975, referring to a meeting to be held on March 25, 1975. According to paragraph 22 of plaintiff's complaint, the meeting was actually held on March 31, 1975, and continued until April 8, 1975. Thus, the plaintiff received notice 20 days before the first board meeting was held to consider his case. This certainly is fair notice of a high school suspension proceeding. The plaintiff's further contention that he was not adequately informed of each charge filed against him by a teacher — see paragraph 19 of the complaint — does not raise to the level of a due process deprivation. So long as adequate notice of the suspension hearing itself is provided, the court sees no constitutional 387*387 issue involved in whether notice of each charge brought by a teacher be given at the exact time of the incident in question or at a subsequent date before the suspension hearing. The plaintiff also contends that he was never notified of the school regulations under which he was punished but he was clearly notified of the charges against him and this is sufficient for due process purposes. Plaintiff's final — and strongest — argument is that the suspension hearing was not fair. The complaint outlines the nature of the hearing as follows: Exhibit F demonstrates that the plaintiff was represented by counsel prior to as well as at this hearing. The plaintiff's argument, in essence, boils down to a contention that the School Board was not fair, unbiased, and impartial. He contends that the double role performed by the School Solicitor, see paragraph 23 of the complaint, supra, requires this court to find that the plaintiff was not accorded due process of law. The court is aware of two recent cases in Pennsylvania State Courts involving similar factual situations to this case. Horn v. Township of Hilltown, 337 A.2d 858 (1975) (Pa. Supreme Court) involved the following factual pattern: The court held that this procedure was too susceptible to prejudice to meet the requirements of procedural due process; it was not necessary for the plaintiff to show actual prejudice. Appeal of Feldman, 346 A.2d 895 (1975) (Pa. Comm. Court), is even closer to the facts of this case. The plaintiff, a temporary professional school employee, was notified that his performance was rated unsatisfactory. The School Board meeting at which he was dismissed was conducted as follows: at 895, 6. The court invalidated this procedure, relying on Horn. While the court is not bound by these decisions, they can be distinguished from the facts of this case. The Goss, Wood, and Sills cases, supra, all emphasized the limited nature of students rights to fair procedure while at the same time recognizing that such rights do exist. This court, as was the Supreme Court in Goss, is concerned about overwhelming the administrative facilities of schools and of diverting costs from other activities with excessively formalized disciplinary procedures. We can take judicial notice of the magnitude of disciplinary problems in public schools and of the large number of suspensions which appear necessary to keep students in line.[1] It may well be that the school board was not neutral and unbiased. The same may be true of numerous school boards that make decisions of this type. Goss teaches us that our inquiry need be directed only to ensuring that the rudiments of fair procedure be followed. As long as a student is given a formal hearing by the school board and is represented by counsel, the court feels it is reasonable for the school solicitor to prosecute the case against him or her, rule on evidentiary questions, and advise the board as to possible action. See English v. North East Board of Education, 385 F.Supp. 1174 (W.D.Pa.1974). Of course, this presents a possibility for abuse and prejudice. But to a certain extent, the federal courts must rely on the discretion, honor, and good judgment of school officials. The only alternative is to accord a right to appeal all suspensions to the federal courts — a process which would overwhelm the already crowded court dockets. The court thus holds that for a thirty-day suspension, it is not unconstitutional for a school solicitor to act in the dual roles of prosecutor and advisor to a school board as long as the student is represented by counsel and given an opportunity to present his side of the story. In the nature of things, it is the solicitor's duty to appear for the board. Outside counsel need not be engaged. Thus, again the plaintiff's factual allegations, even if proved, do not create a constitutional issue and his procedural claims will be dismissed. It may also be noted that Wood implicitly held that a student has an avenue of access to the federal courts if a school board acts in a grossly unfair or arbitrary manner. The court denied a 1983 suit to review suspensions where there was "some evidence" in the record supporting the charges against the students. While this court is dealing with a motion to dismiss, the plaintiff's complaint contains as Exhibit C notices from teachers containing ample grounds for suspension entirely aside from the regulations. These notices include incidents of shouting obscenities in school halls and to teachers, disruptive behavior in class such as throwing objects around the room, and verbal assaults upon female students. Considering these incidents, the court sees nothing unfair in a thirty-day suspension. The notices furnished ample due process insofar as the nature of the charges to be heard was concerned. (D) Equal Protection. (D) Equal Protection. The plaintiff's equal protection claims have already been disposed of in the previous discussion. The court's holding that the high school regulations are not unconstitutionally vague disposes of the facial invalidity type of the equal protection claim. And the court's holding that the plaintiff was accorded constitutional due process disposes of the "as applied" type of equal protection claim. An appropriate Judgment Order will be entered. [1] Footnote 10 to Mr. Justice Powell's dissenting opinion in Goss, 419 U.S. at p. 592, 95 S.Ct. at p. 745, 42 L.Ed.2d at p. 745 illustrates the magnitude of this problem. Save trees - read court opinions online on Google Scholar.