ASUS COMPUTER INTERNATIONAL v. INTERDIGITAL, INC., Dist. Court, ND California 2019 ASUS COMPUTER INTERNATIONAL, et al., Plaintiffs, v. INTERDIGITAL, INC., et al., Defendants. United States District Court, N.D. California, San Jose Division. ASUS Computer International & ASUSTeK Computer Inc, Plaintiffs, represented by Brian R. Nester, Sidley Austin LLP, David Giardina, Sidley Austin LLP, pro hac vice, Jinyung Lee, Sidley Austin LLP, Michael J. Bettinger, Sidley Austin LLP, Michael Franzinger, Sidley Austin LLP, Nathan A. Greenblatt, Sidley Austin LLP & Richard A. Cederoth, Sidley Austin LLP. InterDigital, Inc., InterDigital Communications, Inc., InterDigital Technology Corporation, IPR Licensing, Inc. & InterDigital Patent Holdings, Inc., Defendants, represented by David Sidney Steuer, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Jose Carlos Villarreal, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich Rosati, pro hac vice, Lucy Yen, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Matthew Robert Reed, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Maura Lea Rees, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati & Michael Brett Levin, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati. Pegatron Corporation, Intervenor, represented by Sonal N. Mehta, Durie Tangri LLP. IPR Licensing, Inc., InterDigital, Inc., InterDigital Patent Holdings, Inc., InterDigital Communications, Inc. & InterDigital Technology Corporation, Counter-claimants, represented by David Sidney Steuer, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Jose Carlos Villarreal, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich Rosati, Lucy Yen, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Matthew Robert Reed, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Maura Lea Rees, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati & Michael Brett Levin, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati. ASUS Computer International & ASUSTeK Computer Inc, Counter-defendants, represented by Brian R. Nester, Sidley Austin LLP, David Giardina, Sidley Austin LLP, Michael J. Bettinger, Sidley Austin LLP, Michael Franzinger, Sidley Austin LLP & Richard A. Cederoth, Sidley Austin LLP. OMNIBUS ORDER RE: SEALING MOTIONS AT ECF 276, 278, 326, 327, 336, AND 350 OMNIBUS ORDER RE: SEALING MOTIONS AT ECF 276, 278, 326, 327, 336, AND 350 [Re: ECF 276, 278, 326, 327, 336, 350] [Re: ECF 276, 278, 326, 327, 336, 350] BETH LABSON FREEMAN, District Judge. Before the Court are Defendants' and Plaintiffs' administrative motions to file under seal portions of their motions and exhibits, oppositions and exhibits, and replies and exhibits in connection with the parties' Daubert motions. ECF 276, 278, 326, 327, 336, 350. For the reasons stated below, the motions are GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. I. LEGAL STANDARD I. LEGAL STANDARD "Historically, courts have recognized a `general right to inspect and copy public records and documents, including judicial records and documents.'" Kamakana v. City & Cty. Of Honolulu, 447 F.3d 1172, 1178 (9th Cir. 2006) (quoting Nixon v. Warner Commc'ns, Inc., 435 U.S. 589, 597 & n. 7 (1978)). Accordingly, when considering a sealing request, "a `strong presumption in favor of access' is the starting point." Id. (quoting Foltz v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 331 F.3d 1122, 1135 (9th Cir. 2003)). Parties seeking to seal judicial records relating to motions that are "more than tangentially related to the underlying cause of action" bear the burden of overcoming the presumption with "compelling reasons" that outweigh the general history of access and the public policies favoring disclosure. Ctr. for Auto Safety v. Chrysler Grp., 809 F.3d 1092, 1099 (9th Cir. 2016); Kamakana, 447 F.3d at 1178-79. However, "while protecting the public's interest in access to the courts, we must remain mindful of the parties' right to access those same courts upon terms which will not unduly harm their competitive interest." Apple Inc. v. Samsung Elecs. Co., Ltd., 727 F.3d 1214, 1228-29 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Records attached to motions that are "not related, or only tangentially related, to the merits of a case" therefore are not subject to the strong presumption of access. Ctr. for Auto Safety, 809 F.3d at 1099; see also Kamakana, 447 F.3d at 1179 ("[T]he public has less of a need for access to court records attached only to non-dispositive motions because those documents are often unrelated, or only tangentially related, to the underlying cause of action."). Parties moving to seal the documents attached to such motions must meet the lower "good cause" standard of Rule 26(c). Kamakana, 447 F.3d at 1179 (internal quotations and citations omitted). This standard requires a "particularized showing," id., that "specific prejudice or harm will result" if the information is disclosed. Phillips ex rel. Estates of Byrd v. Gen. Motors Corp., 307 F.3d 1206, 1210-11 (9th Cir. 2002); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(c). "Broad allegations of harm, unsubstantiated by specific examples of articulated reasoning" will not suffice. Beckman Indus., Inc. v. Int'l Ins. Co., 966 F.2d 470, 476 (9th Cir. 1992). A protective order sealing the documents during discovery may reflect the court's previous determination that good cause exists to keep the documents sealed, see Kamakana, 447 F.3d at 1179-80, but a blanket protective order that allows the parties to designate confidential documents does not provide sufficient judicial scrutiny to determine whether each particular document should remain sealed. See Civ. L.R. 79-5(d)(1)(A) ("Reference to a stipulation or protective order that allows a party to designate certain documents as confidential is not sufficient to establish that a document, or portions thereof, are sealable."). In addition to making particularized showings of good cause, parties moving to seal documents must comply with the procedures established by Civ. L.R. 79-5. Pursuant to Civ. L.R. 79-5(b), a sealing order is appropriate only upon a request that establishes the document is "sealable," or "privileged or protectable as a trade secret or otherwise entitled to protection under the law." "The request must be narrowly tailored to seek sealing only of sealable material, and must conform with Civil L.R. 79-5(d)." Civ. L.R. 79-5(b). In part, Civ. L.R. 79-5(d) requires the submitting party to attach a "proposed order that is narrowly tailored to seal only the sealable material" which "lists in table format each document or portion thereof that is sought to be sealed," Civ. L.R. 79-5(d)(1)(b), and an "unredacted version of the document" that indicates "by highlighting or other clear method, the portions of the document that have been omitted from the redacted version." Civ. L.R. 79-5(d)(1)(d). "Within 4 days of the filing of the Administrative Motion to File Under Seal, the Designating Party must file a declaration as required by subsection 79-5(d)(1)(A) establishing that all of the designated material is sealable." Civ. L.R. 79-5(e)(1). II. DISCUSSION II. DISCUSSION The Court has reviewed the sealing motions and the declarations of the designating parties submitted in support thereof. The Court finds that the parties have articulated good cause and compelling reasons to seal certain portions of the submitted documents. The proposed redactions are generally narrowly tailored. The Court's rulings on the sealing requests are set forth in the tables below. A. ECF 276 (Defendants' Motion as to Defendants' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits ("Daubert Motion")) A. ECF 276 (Defendants' Motion as to Defendants' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits ("Daubert Motion")) ECF Document to be Sealed: Result Reasoning No. 276-4 A: Daubert Motion DENIED as to portions Cites sealable material in exhibits, quoting or substantively as discussed below, and contains citing exhibits below or confidential information relating portions thereof that are to the parties' licensing non-sealable. negotiations, Defendants' licenses, and Defendants' and Plaintiffs' GRANTED as to technical analyses of Defendants' remaining highlighted patents. Weinberg Decl. ISO Mot. portions. ¶ 4 ("Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl."), ECF 295; Reed Decl. ISO Mot. ¶ 5 ("Reed Mot. Decl."), ECF 276-1. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. To the extent the redacted portions quote or substantively cite exhibits or portions thereof that this Court has determined are unsealable, the request is DENIED. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 276-6 B: Expert Report of GRANTED as to Contains confidential information Apostolos K. "Paul" ¶¶ 191, 193, 203-206. relating to the parties' licensing Kakaes negotiations and subject to a non-disclosure agreement between the parties. Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl. ¶¶ 3, 5. Disclosure of the information in these paragraphs could cause harm to the parties. Because Plaintiffs, the designating parties, do not seek to seal the remainder, Defendants are ORDERED to file a redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 276-8 C: Corrected Expert GRANTED. Contains confidential information Report of Fiona M. relating to the parties' licensing Scott Morton, Ph.D. negotiations, Defendants' licenses and negotiations with third parties, and Plaintiffs' internal financial and business strategies. Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl. ¶ 6; Reed Mot. Decl. ¶ 7. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 276-9 D: Supplemental Expert GRANTED. Contains confidential information Report of Fiona M. relating to the parties' licensing Scott Morton, Ph.D. negotiations and Defendants' internal licensing practices. Reed Mot. Decl. ¶ 8. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to Defendants. Id. 276-10 E: Corrected Expert GRANTED. Contains confidential information Report of Dr. Gregory relating to the parties' licensing K. Leonard negotiations and Defendants' licenses, including confidential royalty and financial terms. Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl. ¶ 7; Reed Mot. Decl. ¶ 9. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 276-11 F: Second Supplemental GRANTED. Contains confidential information Expert Rebuttal Report relating to the parties' licensing of Dr. Gregory K. negotiations and Defendants' Leonard internal licensing practices. Reed Mot. Decl. ¶ 10. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 276-12 G: Excerpts from the GRANTED as to lines Contains confidential information Deposition Transcript 17:4-11, 18:7-19:25, relating to a confidential of Sachin Sinha 21:1-22:25, 30:2-32:13, arbitration and consultation that 36:1-37:17, Mr. Sinha conducted at the 38:14-39:25, 45:4-49:25, direction and request of Sidley 63:15-18, 74:1-75:25, Austin and other confidential 78:2-79:25, parties. Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl. 81:8-25, 98:2-24, ¶ 8. Disclosure of such 117:1-25. information could cause harm to Plaintiffs and third parties. DENIED as to Because Plaintiffs, the designating remainder. parties, do not seek to seal the remainder, Defendants are ORDERED to file a redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 276-13 H: Excerpts from the GRANTED as to lines Contains confidential information Deposition Transcript 60:10-25, 70:8-72:3, relating to a confidential of Apostolos Kakaes 72:9-73:16, 74:6-25, arbitration and consultation 85:7-25, 130:12-25, conducted at the direction and 132:1-25, 193:9-25, request of Sidley Austin and other 200:18-201:2. confidential parties. Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl. ¶ 9. Disclosure of DENIED as to such information could cause remainder. harm to Plaintiffs and third parties. Because Plaintiffs, the designating parties, do not seek to seal the remainder, Defendants are ORDERED to file a redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 276-14 I: Excerpts from the GRANTED. Contains confidential information Deposition Transcript relating to a confidential of Nitin Agrawal arbitration and consultation conducted at the direction and request of Sidley Austin and other confidential parties. Weinberg Def. Mot. Decl. ¶ 10. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to Plaintiffs and third parties. 276-15 J: Excerpts from the GRANTED. Contains confidential information Corrected Rebuttal relating to Defendants' and Expert Report of Plaintiffs' technical analyses of Branimir Vojcic Defendants' patents. Reed Mot. Decl. ¶ 14. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to Defendants. Id. 276-16 K: Excerpts from the GRANTED. Contains confidential information Corrected Rebuttal relating to Defendants' and Expert Report of Wayne Plaintiffs' technical analyses of Stark, Ph.D. Defendants' patents. Reed Mot. Decl. ¶ 15. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to Defendants. Id. 276-17 L: Appendix A of the DENIED. Because Plaintiffs, the designating Expert Report of parties, do not seek to seal this Apostolos K. "Paul" document, Defendants are Kakaes, bearing Bates ORDERED to file an unredacted number version of this document in the ASUS_0080579 public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 276-18 M: Excerpts from the DENIED. Because Plaintiffs, the designating Deposition Transcript parties, do not seek to seal this of Philippe Stoffel-Munck document, Defendants are ORDERED to file an unredacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 276-19 N: Appendix B of the DENIED. Because Plaintiffs, the designating Expert Report of parties, do not seek to seal this Apostolos K. "Paul" document, Defendants are Kakaes, produced by ORDERED to file an unredacted ASUS, bearing Bates version of this document in the number public record no earlier than 4 ASUS 0080580 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. B. ECF 278 (Plaintiffs' Motion as to Plaintiffs' Motion to Exclude Defendants' Experts' Im ro er Testimony and Exhibits ("Daubert Motion" B. ECF 278 (Plaintiffs' Motion as to Plaintiffs' Motion to Exclude Defendants' Experts' Im ro er Testimony and Exhibits ("Daubert Motion" ECF Document to be Sealed: Result Reasoning No. 278-3 A: Daubert Motion DENIED as to Cites sealable material in exhibits, portions quoting or as discussed below, and otherwise substantively citing contains confidential information exhibits below or relating to the parties' licensing portions thereof that negotiations, Plaintiffs' and are non-sealable. Defendants' licensing strategies and licenses and negotiations with GRANTED as to third parties, and the confidential remaining highlighted arbitration between the parties. portions. Weinberg Decl. ISO Mot. ¶ 2 ("Weinberg Pl. Mot. Decl."), ECF 280; Rees Decl. ISO Mot. ¶ 4 ("Rees Decl."), ECF 296. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. To the extent the redacted portions quote or substantively cite exhibits or portions thereof that this Court has determined are unsealable, the request is DENIED. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 278-5 C: Exh 1 — excerpts from GRANTED as to all Contains confidential information the deposition transcript orange highlighted relating to the parties' licensing of Defendants' expert portions in ECF 297. negotiations and Plaintiffs' and Anne Layne-Farrar Defendants' licenses and negotiations with third parties. Rees Decl. ¶ 5; Weinberg Pl. Mot. Decl. ¶ 4. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 278-6 D. Exh 2 — excerpts from GRANTED. Contains confidential information the Corrected Rebuttal relating to the parties' licensing Expert Report of negotiations and Plaintiffs' and Defendants' expert Anne Defendants' licenses and Layne-Farrar negotiations with third parties, and the arbitration between the parties. Rees Decl. ¶ 6; Weinberg Pl. Mot. Decl. ¶ 5. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 278-7 E: Exh 4 — excerpts from GRANTED as to all Contains confidential information the deposition testimony orange highlighted relating to third parties' licensing of Defendants' expert portions in ECF 297-1. negotiations and licenses. Rees Bertram Huber Decl. ¶ 7. 278-9 G: Exh. 5 — excerpts from DENIED. Because Defendants, the the Opening Expert designating parties, do not seek to Report of Defendants' seal this document, Plaintiffs are expert Dr. Bertram ORDERED to file an unredacted Huber version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 278-10 H: Exh. 6 — excerpts from GRANTED as to all Contains confidential information the Rebuttal Expert orange highlighted relating to the parties' licensing Report of Defendants' portions in ECF 297-2. negotiations and Plaintiffs' and expert Dr. Bertram Defendants' licenses and Huber negotiations with third parties. Rees Decl. ¶ 9; Weinberg Pl. Mot. Decl. ¶ 9. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 278-11 I: Exh. 7 — excerpts from GRANTED as to ¶¶ ¶¶ 315-316, 335-336, and 360, the Corrected Rebuttal 315-316, 335-336, and which Plaintiffs seek to seal, Expert Report of 360. contain confidential information Defendants' expert relating to the parties' licensing Jonathan D. Putnam negotiations and Plaintiffs' and Defendants' licenses and DENIED WITHOUT negotiations with third parties. PREJUDICE as to Rees Decl. ¶ 10; Weinberg Pl. remainder. Mot. Decl. ¶ 10. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. Defendants seek to seal the entire document, but this request is DENIED WITHOUT PREJUDICE because it is not narrowly tailored. There are many paragraphs throughout the report that are not specific to Defendants and do not contain confidential, sensitive information. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 278-12 J: Exh. 10 — excerpts GRANTED as to all Contains confidential information from the deposition orange highlighted relating to the parties' licensing testimony of Defendants' portions in ECF 297-3. negotiations and Plaintiffs' and expert Jonathan D. Defendants' licenses and Putnam negotiations with third parties, and the arbitration between the parties. Rees Decl. ¶ 11; Weinberg Pl. Mot. Decl. ¶ 11. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 278-13 K: Exh. 13 — excerpts GRANTED. Contains confidential information from the transcript of the relating to the parties' licensing arbitration proceeding negotiations and the arbitration between the parties between the parties. Rees Decl. ¶ produced by ASUS 12; Weinberg Pl. Mot. Decl. ¶ 12. bearing Bates stamps Disclosure of such information IDC-ASUS-1716-0225382 — 437 could cause harm to both parties. Id. C. ECF 326 (Defendants' Motion as to Defendants' Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion to Exclude Defendants' Experts' Testimony and Exhibits C. ECF 326 (Defendants' Motion as to Defendants' Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion to Exclude Defendants' Experts' Testimony and Exhibits ECF Document to be Sealed: Result Reasoning No. 326-4 A: Defendants' DENIED as to Cites sealable material in exhibits, Opposition to Plaintiffs' portions quoting or as discussed below, and otherwise Daubert Motion substantively citing contains confidential information exhibits below or relating to the parties' licensing portions thereof that negotiations, Plaintiffs' and are non-sealable. Defendants' licensing strategies and licenses and negotiations with GRANTED as to third parties, and the arbitration remaining highlighted between the parties. Miller Decl. portions. ISO Mot. ¶ 5 ("Miller Decl."), ECF 326-1; Franzinger Decl. ISO Mot. ¶ 4 ("Franzinger Decl."), ECF 332. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. To the extent the redacted portions quote or substantively cite exhibits or portions thereof that this Court has determined are unsealable, the request is DENIED. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 326-5 B: Excerpts from the GRANTED. Contains confidential information Corrected Expert relating to the parties' licensing Report of Dr. Anne negotiations, Defendants' Layne-Farrar licensing strategies and licenses and negotiations with third parties, and the arbitration between the parties. Miller Decl. ¶ 6; Franzinger Decl. ¶ 5. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 326-6 C: Excerpts from the GRANTED. Contains confidential information Corrected relating to the parties' licensing Rebuttal Expert Report negotiations and Defendants' and of Jonathan D. Plaintiffs' licensing strategies and Putnam, licenses and negotiations with third parties. Miller Decl. ¶ 7; Franzinger Decl. ¶ 6. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 326-7 D. Excerpts from the GRANTED. Contains confidential information Opening Expert relating to the parties' licensing Report of Dr. Bertram negotiations and Defendants' Huber. licensing and negotiating strategies. Miller Decl. ¶ 8. 326-8 E: Excerpts from the DENIED. Because Plaintiffs, the designating deposition parties, do not seek to seal this transcript of ASUS's document, Defendants are expert Fiona M. ORDERED to file an unredacted Scott Morton version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 326-9 F: Excerpts from the DENIED. Because Plaintiffs, the designating deposition parties, do not seek to seal this transcript of ASUS's document, Defendants are expert Philippe ORDERED to file an unredacted Stoffel-Munck version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. D. ECF 327 (Plaintiffs' Motion as to Plaintiffs' Opposition to Defendants' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits D. ECF 327 (Plaintiffs' Motion as to Plaintiffs' Opposition to Defendants' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits ECF Document to be Sealed: Result Reasoning No. 327-4 A: Opposition to DENIED as to Cites sealable material in exhibits, Defendants' Daubert portions quoting or as discussed below, and otherwise Motion substantively citing contains confidential information exhibits below or relating to the parties' licensing portions thereof that negotiations, Plaintiffs' and are non-sealable. Defendants' licensing strategies and licenses and negotiations with GRANTED as to third parties. Franzinger Decl. remaining highlighted ISO Mot. ("Franzinger Opp. portions. Decl.") ¶ 2, ECF 327-1; Rees Decl. ISO Mot. ("Rees Opp. Decl.") ¶ 4, ECF 333. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. To the extent the redacted portions quote or substantively cite exhibits or portions thereof that this Court has determined are unsealable, the request is DENIED. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 327-5 B: Exh 1 — Corrected GRANTED as to all Contains confidential information Expert Report of green highlighted relating to the parties' licensing Dr. Anne Layne-Farrar portions in ECF 333-2. negotiations, Defendants' licensing strategies, and licenses DENIED as to and negotiations with third parties. remainder. Rees Opp. Decl. ¶ 5; Franzinger Opp. Decl. ¶ 3. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. Because neither party seeks to seal the remainder of the document, Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file an appropriately redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 327-6 C: Exh 2 — Corrected GRANTED. Contains confidential information Rebuttal Expert Report relating to the parties' licensing of Jonathan D. Putnam negotiations, Defendants' licensing strategies, and licenses and negotiations with third parties. Rees Opp. Decl. ¶ 6; Franzinger Opp. Decl. ¶ 4. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 327-8 D. Exh 3 — excerpts of GRANTED as to Contains confidential information Dr. Apostolos Kakaes's entire document. relating to technical analyses of Deposition Transcript Defendants' patents, the parties' licensing negotiations, and Defendants' licensing and negotiation strategies. Franzinger Opp. Decl. ¶ 5; Rees Opp. Decl. ¶ 7. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 327-10 E: Exh. 4 — excerpt of DENIED. Defendants do not seek to seal this Sachin Kumar Sinha's document, and no good cause Deposition Transcript exists to seal the information therein based on Plaintiffs averments. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 327-12 F: Exh. 5 — excerpts of GRANTED as to entire Contains confidential information Dr. Jonathan D. document. relating to technical analyses of Putnam's Deposition Defendants' patents, the parties' Transcript licensing negotiations, and Defendants' licensing and negotiation strategies. Rees Opp. Decl. ¶ 8. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. 327-14 G: Exh. 7 — excerpts of DENIED. Defendants do not seek to seal this Nitin Agrawal's document, and no good cause Deposition Transcript exists to seal the information therein based on Plaintiffs averments. Plaintiffs are ORDERED to file this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 327-15 H: Exh. 9 — excerpts of GRANTED. Contains confidential information Dr. Jorge Padilla Expert relating to the parties' licensing Report negotiations, Defendants' licensing strategies, and licenses and negotiations with third parties. Rees Opp. Decl. ¶ 9; Franzinger Opp. Decl. ¶ 9. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. E. ECF 336 (Defendants' Motion as to Defendants' Reply in support of Defendants' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits E. ECF 336 (Defendants' Motion as to Defendants' Reply in support of Defendants' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits ECF Document to be Sealed: Result Reasoning No. 336-4 A: Reply in support of DENIED as to Cites sealable material in exhibits, Defendants' Daubert portions quoting or as discussed below, and otherwise Motion substantively citing contains confidential information exhibits or portions of relating to the parties' licensing briefs the Court has negotiations, Plaintiffs' and determined in this Defendants' licensing strategies Order are non-sealable. and licenses and negotiations with third parties, and the confidential arbitration between the parties. GRANTED as to Lee Decl. ISO Reply ¶ 2, ECF remaining highlighted 336-1; Rees Decl. ISO Reply ¶ 4, portions. ECF 347. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. To the extent the redacted portions quote or substantively cite exhibits or briefs or portions thereof that this Court has determined are unsealable, the request is DENIED. Defendants are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. F. ECF 350 (Plaintiffs' Motion as to Plaintiffs' Reply in support of Plaintiffs' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits) F. ECF 350 (Plaintiffs' Motion as to Plaintiffs' Reply in support of Plaintiffs' Motion to Exclude Opinions and Testimony and Exhibits) ECF Document to be Sealed: Result Reasoning No. 350-4 A: Reply in support of DENIED as to Cites sealable material in exhibits, Defendants' Daubert portions quoting or as discussed below, and otherwise Motion substantively citing contains confidential information exhibits or portions of relating to the parties' licensing briefs the Court has negotiations, Plaintiffs' and determined in this Defendants' licensing strategies, Order are non-sealable. licenses and negotiations with third parties, the confidential arbitration between the parties, GRANTED as to and confidential legal remaining highlighted consultations. portions. Miller Decl. ISO Reply ¶ 5, ECF 350-1; Franzinger Decl. ISO Pl. Reply ¶¶ 3-4, ECF 354. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to both parties. Id. To the extent the redacted portions quote or substantively cite exhibits or briefs or portions thereof that this Court has determined are unsealable, the request is DENIED. Defendants are ORDERED to file a partially redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 350-5 B: Reed Decl., Ex. 16 GRANTED as to lines Contains confidential information Excerpts from the 46:7-23, 51:8-20, relating to a confidential deposition transcript of 52:16-19, 67:16-25, arbitration and consultation that ASUS's expert Sachin 68:1-8, 151:8-22. Mr. Sinha conducted at the Kumar Sinha, dated direction and request of Sidley July 10, 2018 DENIED as to Austin and other confidential remainder. parties. Franzinger Decl. ¶¶ 5. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to Plaintiffs and third parties. Because Plaintiffs, the designating parties, do not seek to seal the remainder, Defendants are ORDERED to file a redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. 350-6 C: Reed Decl., Ex. 19 GRANTED as to lines Contains confidential information Excerpts from the 76:6-77:12, 79:9-80:1, relating to a confidential deposition transcript of and Exhibit 6 at pages arbitration and a confidential ASUS's expert 1-3. consultation that Mr. Kakaes Apostolos Kakaes, conducted at the direction and dated July 13, 2018 DENIED as to request of third parties and/or law remainder. firms in a prior matter. Franzinger Decl. ¶ 6. Disclosure of such information could cause harm to Plaintiffs and third parties. Because Plaintiffs, the designating parties, do not seek to seal the remainder, Defendants are ORDERED to file a redacted version of this document in the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the date of this order. III. ORDER III. ORDER For the foregoing reasons, the motions at ECF 276, 278, 326, 327, 336, and 350 are GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. For any request that has been denied, if the designating party has not already publicly submitted the properly redacted version of the documents, the submitting party must file the unredacted (or lesser redacted) documents into the public record no earlier than 4 days and no later than 10 days from the filing of this order. See Civ. L.R. 79-5(e)(2). IT IS SO ORDERED. Save trees - read court opinions online on Google Scholar.