Baker v. Wendy's of Montana, Inc., 687 P. 2d 885 - Wyo: Supreme Court 1984 Melodi BAKER and Lorraine Bell, Appellants (Plaintiffs), v. WENDY'S OF MONTANA, INC., a Montana Corporation, doing business in Wyoming; Wendy's International, an Ohio Corporation, and Scott Smith, Appellees (Defendants). Supreme Court of Wyoming. 886*886 Stuart S. Healy, Sheridan, for appellants. Michael K. Davis, Sheridan, and J. Dwaine Roybal of Keefer, Roybal, Hanson, Stacey & Jarussi, Billings, Mont., for appellees. Before ROONEY, C.J., and THOMAS, ROSE, BROWN[*] and CARDINE, JJ. ROSE, Justice. The appeal with which this opinion is concerned was originated in the trial court by appellants Melodi Baker and Lorraine Bell. The relevant portions of the complaint alleged assaults and batteries as well as intentional infliction of emotional distress upon the appellants by Scott Smith, an employee of appellee Wendy's of Montana, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as Wendy's), which company was also the appellants' employer and contributed to the Wyoming worker's compensation fund in their behalf. Wendy's filed a motion for summary judgment, which was granted on the ground that the claim was barred by the Wyoming Worker's Compensation Act, § 27-12-101, et seq., W.S. 1977. FACTS FACTS Lorraine Bell's claim flowing from alleged assaults and batteries recounts three specific incidents: two when Smith allegedly touched her on the breast and one when he is said to have touched her buttocks in an offensive manner. Ms. Bell further alleges that Smith uttered a particularly obscene remark, which she contends was addressed to her, and she also says that he made offensive gestures in her presence. This appellant seeks to recover $23 in medical expenses, $355 in damages for past lost wages, an undetermined amount for future lost wages and $30,000 for emotional and mental injury, which damages, she contends, resulted from these intentional improper acts of Mr. Smith. Melodi Baker alleges that Smith also offensively touched her buttocks twice. She says that these touchings caused her to have headaches, and she further charges that Smith made sexual advances on at least two occasions. Ms. Baker was especially upset when Smith allegedly gave her an order concerning the obscene interplay that he wanted her to have with the male customers. As a result of these purported improprieties, Ms. Baker seeks to recover $142 damages for past lost wages and $40,000 damages for mental anguish. In addition, the appellants jointly ask $1,000,000 in punitive damages. It is urged that the liability of Wendy's arises out of its negligent failure to control Scott Smith's conduct and its negligent approval, ratification and participation in the intentional tortious acts of its managerial agent. It is the appellants' theory that Wendy's should be held vicariously liable for compensatory and punitive damages for Smith's intentionally tortious conduct resulting in injury to appellants for the reason that the corporation was made aware of these touchings, utterances and other improprieties and did not adequately remedy or monitor the situation. The appellants go on to say that, in these circumstances, the injuries complained of were not covered by the Wyoming Worker's Compensation Act and the contributing employer is not, therefore, immune from suit by its employees. 887*887 THE ISSUE AND HOLDING 887*887 THE ISSUE AND HOLDING The principal issue which we must resolve is whether or not the exclusive-remedy provision of the Wyoming Worker's Compensation Act bars the appellants' claims against Wendy's.[1] We will hold that appellants' damages arise from "injuries" received in the scope of and arising out of their employment and, therefore, their sole remedy is to apply to the worker's compensation fund for such relief as it affords. The contributing employer is therefore immune from the suits which have been lodged by the appellants. The summary judgment will be affirmed. BACKGROUND BACKGROUND In 1914, Art. 10, § 4 of the Wyoming Constitution was amended to read as follows: Prior to the 1914 amendment, Art. 10, § 4 consisted of only the first two sentences. The purpose of the amendment, as expressed by Ch. 124, S.L. of Wyoming 1915, was to authorize the establishment of an Industrial Accident Fund — financed by industry and underwritten by the state — from which injured employees and the dependents of deceased employees who were injured or killed in covered employment could recover stipulated sums from the compensation fund without regard to fault, save only those instances where injury or death occurred through the culpability of the worker. Following the amendment to Art. 10, § 4, the legislature enacted a worker's compensation law which was the legislative embodiment of a compromise between employers and employees who recognized the need for a new system to compensate employees for employment-related injuries without the employee having to rely upon tort concepts. Meyer v. Kendig, Wyo., 641 P.2d 1235, 1237 (1982). See also Barnette v. Doyle, Wyo., 622 P.2d 1349 (1981); Stephenson v. Mitchell, Wyo., 569 P.2d 95 (1977); Zancanelli v. Central Coal & Coke Co., 25 Wyo. 511, 173 P. 981 (1918). The statutory trade-off for the employers contributing to the fund on behalf of their employees was the provision which gave the employer immunity from "all other rights and remedies" (§ 27-12-103(a), supra) which the injured employee might theretofore have possessed. In return, the covered employees and their dependent heirs received the benefit of rapid and certain relief for work-related injuries and death in exchange for forgoing their right to bring common-law 888*888 actions in tort against their employers who were contributing to their accounts in the worker's compensation fund. Meyer v. Kendig, supra, 641 P.2d at 1238; Mauch v. Stanley Structures, Inc., Wyo., 641 P.2d 1247, 1249 (1982); Zancanelli v. Central Coal & Coke Co., supra, 173 P. at 988. The nature of the law in question is that of an industrial insurance act. This court originally placed this interpretation upon Wyoming's Worker's Compensation Act in Zancanelli v. Central Coal & Coke Co., supra, and we have consistently reiterated this view. Meyer v. Kendig, supra; Bence v. Pacific Power and Light Company, Wyo., 631 P.2d 13 (1981); Barnette v. Doyle, supra; Markle v. Williamson, Wyo., 518 P.2d 621 (1974). The industrial-insurance concept evolved from the proposition that industrial accidents are a cost of production and should be borne by the industry. Zancanelli v. Central Coal & Coke Co., supra, 173 P. at 989. In Cottonwood Steel Corporation v. Hansen, Wyo., 655 P.2d 1226 (1982), we took time to point out as clearly as we knew how that tort law was not to be considered an ingredient of the worker's compensation formula because, under our statutes, worker's compensation liabilities and obligations are structured within the realm of contract law — it is like industrial insurance. As between the employer and the employee, except where the employee is culpably negligent, worker's compensation in Wyoming is not structured as a tort concept, where duty, breach of duty, injury, proximate cause and damages become the concerns of the litigants and the courts. In Cottonwood, we said: For all the same reasons that an employer may not avoid paying a compensation claim where the worker is injured through his or her own ordinary negligence, the worker does not have a tort action against the employer when he (or it) is negligent and the worker is covered. This is so because the act creates liability without fault on the part of the contributing employer and likewise provides the employer with absolute immunity from tort actions including the employer's violation of his duty of care whether the negligence is ordinary or culpable. Mauch v. Stanley Structures, Inc., supra, 641 P.2d at 1250; Barnette v. Doyle, supra, 622 P.2d at 1352. This is to say that immunity is absolute. Mauch v. Stanley Structures, Inc., supra, 641 P.2d at 1252 (Rose, C.J., specially concurring). 889*889 Our various interpretations of § 27-12-103(a), W.S. 1977, reflect the absolute immunity afforded contributing employers under the worker's compensation laws of Wyoming. THE LAW APPLICABLE TO THIS APPEAL THE LAW APPLICABLE TO THIS APPEAL Appellants set forth several contentions which they urge have the effect of removing their claims from the worker's compensation law. The single issue for our decision in this appeal is: Was the claimed harm — i.e., assault and battery to the persons of the appellants and intentional infliction of emotional distress — a covered "injury" within the contemplation of the Worker's Compensation Act? If the appellants' allegations of harm constitute "injury" as conceived by the Act, and if it was inflicted when the appellants were within the scope of their employment, there cannot be an independent right of action against Wendy's because that company is the contributing employer of the appellants and would therefore be absolutely immune from suit.[2] The test for determining whether the exclusive-remedy provisions of the Worker's Compensation Act operate to prevent actions against covered employers for intentional acts of employees is whether or not the claimed injury would be compensable under the Act. Assuming this to be the test for deciding whether the worker's compensation statute, § 27-12-103, provides the workers with an exclusive remedy under the facts of this case, it becomes necessary to determine whether the kinds of injuries which are claimed by the appellants would be compensable under the Worker's Compensation Act. Emotional Injury Is Compensable Emotional Injury Is Compensable The relevant Wyoming statute provides as follows: The trial court found that the appellants' claims were for "psychic injuries" when the judge said: It is well established that mental disorders are compensable under the various worker's compensation acts of the country. The Annotation at 97 A.L.R.3d 161 collects cases in which mental disorders have been held to be compensable. In Albertson's, Inc. v. Workers' Compensation Appeals Board, 131 Cal. App.3d 308, 182 Cal. Rptr. 304 (1982), the plaintiff was employed at a bakery in an Albertson's store. She had problems getting along with her supervisor, who threatened to get rid of her, and told her "`"[y]ou better get your butt in high gear because there's nothing here to sell."'" The plaintiff in that case claimed she was "`so embarrassed that [she] just wanted to die,'" and that she was forced to take tranquilizers to compensate for her depression and other psychological factors. This is Ms. Bell's claim in the case at bar. The court, in Albertson's, held that the claims were compensable. In Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations, 72 Wis.2d 46, 240 N.W.2d 128 (1976), the plaintiff suffered a nervous breakdown which she attributed to the heavy workload in the workplace together with the fact that her supervisor was The Supreme Court of Wisconsin held that the injury was compensable, so long as the plaintiff's mental disturbances were caused by the stress and strains of her employment. In Carter v. General Motors Corporation, 361 Mich. 577, 106 N.W.2d 105 (1960), the plaintiff was working as a machine operator in a General Motors plant. When he attempted to follow proper procedures in doing his job, he fell behind. When he took shortcuts, he violated procedures at the plant, and was berated by his supervisor. As a result of all this, he claimed he suffered a disabling psychosis. The Michigan Supreme Court held that the injury was compensable. See also Todd v. Goostree, Mo. App., 493 S.W.2d 411 (1973); for mental injury resulting from overwork, Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. v. Industrial Commission, 119 Ariz. 51, 579 P.2d 555 (1978); for shock resulting from having found the plaintiff's supervisor's body after he had committed suicide, Wolfe v. Sibley, Lindsay & Curr Co., 36 N.Y.2d 505, 369 N.Y.S.2d 637, 330 N.E.2d 603 (1975); and for disability resulting from stress associated with a demotion, Korter v. EBI Companies, Inc., 46 Or. App. 43, 610 P.2d 312 (1980). 891*891 These above-cited cases holding mental injury to be compensable under worker's compensation laws are consistent with the holding of this court on the subject. In Consolidated Freightways v. Drake, Wyo., 678 P.2d 874 (1984), we held that nontraumatically caused mental injury was compensable under certain work conditions. We noted with approval that Larson in 1B Law of Workmen's Compensation, § 42.20, has delineated three types of psychic injury: In the case at bar, the appellants charge that they received both a physical trauma (touching) which caused a nervous injury (category (2) of Larson, supra) and a mental stimulus which caused a nervous injury (category (3) of Larson, supra). In Consolidated Freightways, we addressed a set of facts which contemplated category (3) of Larson, supra, i.e., a mental stimulus which causes a nervous injury. In holding this category of nontraumatically caused psychic injury to be compensable, we said that it must have resulted from a situation of greater dimension than the day-to-day mental stresses and tensions which all employees must experience, citing Wisconsin Supreme Court authority from Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Department of Industry, Labor and Health Relations, supra, and School District # 1, Village of Brown Deer v. Department of Industry, Labor & Human Relations, 62 Wis.2d 370, 215 N.W.2d 373 (1974). We went on to cite other states' authority, all holding that nontraumatically induced mental injury is compensable according to the distinctions which are described in the opinions cited at 678 P.2d at 877. We then held, in Consolidated Freightways, that the facts of that case supported a finding that the nontraumatically induced injury resulted from a situation of greater dimensions than the worker's day-to-day mental stresses and tensions that were a part of his daily work life and therefore his injury was compensable. In similar fashion, the verbal abuse and offensive manners of appellants' supervisor created an employment condition characterized by pressures and tensions beyond those usually experienced by employees. Under our holding in Consolidated Freightways, the psychological injuries resulting from such unusual employment strain qualify for compensation under the state Worker's Compensation Act. With respect to category (2) of Larson, supra, we can find no reason to accept concepts which argue that a physical trauma which causes a nervous injury should not be regarded as compensable while holding, in Consolidated Freightways v. Drake, supra, that a mental stimulus which causes a nervous injury is compensable (category (3) of Larson, supra). Larson says of category (2), supra, physical trauma causing nervous injury: Arising Out of the Employment Arising Out of the Employment The parties to this appeal agree that the appellants' injuries occurred "in the course of" their employment or "in the scope of" their employment, as those phrases have been interpreted by this court. Cottonwood Steel Corporation v. Hansen, supra; In re Willey, Wyo., 571 P.2d 248 (1977); In re Jensen, 63 Wyo. 88, 892*892 178 P.2d 897 (1947). Appellants, however, contend that while they suffered their injuries in the course of employment, the injuries did not "aris[e] out of" employment within the meaning of § 27-12-102(a)(xii), W.S. 1977.[4] We have held that, in order for this section of the Act to be complied with, there must be a causal connection between the injury and the course of employment, and that the causal connection is supplied We have said: Larson, in his treatise, Workmen's Compensation Law, says: It cannot be seriously argued that the facts of this case do not meet the nexus test quoted from our opinions supra. According to that test, the injury clearly arose out of the employment. CONCLUSION CONCLUSION We hold that the injuries complained of are compensable from the worker's compensation fund under the Worker's Compensation Act; that the injuries do arise out of the employment in question; and, therefore, the employer is absolutely immune from the suits brought by these appellants. Affirmed. [*] BROWN, J., did not participate in the decision of this case. [1] Section 27-12-103(a), W.S. 1977, provides: "The rights and remedies provided in this act [§§ 27-12-101 through XX-XX-XXX] for an employee and his dependents for injuries incurred in extrahazardous employments are in lieu of all other rights and remedies against any employer making contributions required by this act or his employees acting within the scope of their employment unless the employees are culpably negligent, but do not supersede any rights and remedies available to an employee and his dependents against any other person." (Emphasis added.) "The rights and remedies provided in this act [§§ 27-12-101 through XX-XX-XXX] for an employee and his dependents for injuries incurred in extrahazardous employments are in lieu of all other rights and remedies against any employer making contributions required by this act or his employees acting within the scope of their employment unless the employees are culpably negligent, but do not supersede any rights and remedies available to an employee and his dependents against any other person." (Emphasis added.) [2] See n. 1, supra. [3] See n. 68 of § 42.22, Larson, supra, for extensive authority. [4] Section 27-12-102(a)(xii), W.S. 1977, provides: "`Injury' means any harmful change in the human organism other than normal aging, and includes damage to or loss of a prosthetic appliance and death, arising out of and in the course of employment while at work in or about the premises occupied, used or controlled by the employer, incurred while at work in places where the employer's business requires an employee's presence and which subjects the employee to extrahazardous duties incident to the business. The term does not include: "(A) Any communicable disease unless the risk of contracting the disease is increased by the nature of the employment; "(B) Injury caused by an employee's intoxication or by his willful intention to injure or kill himself or another; or "(C) Injury due solely to the culpable negligence of the injured employee." "`Injury' means any harmful change in the human organism other than normal aging, and includes damage to or loss of a prosthetic appliance and death, arising out of and in the course of employment while at work in or about the premises occupied, used or controlled by the employer, incurred while at work in places where the employer's business requires an employee's presence and which subjects the employee to extrahazardous duties incident to the business. The term does not include: "(A) Any communicable disease unless the risk of contracting the disease is increased by the nature of the employment; "(B) Injury caused by an employee's intoxication or by his willful intention to injure or kill himself or another; or "(C) Injury due solely to the culpable negligence of the injured employee." Save trees - read court opinions online on Google Scholar.